As was discussed in the first lesson of this course, one of the most important aspects of being a productive data scientist is staying organized. And a big part of staying organized is in knowing where your files are located. In these next few lessons, we will be getting you fluent in orienting yourself in file systems in two areas: the Terminal and R/R Studio. In this lesson, we will focus on working with the Terminal.

The Terminal is an interface to the operating system of a computer. That is, it provides a way for you to type commands in order to perform actions on a computer. For example, there are commands to create new files and folders and to open files and folders. On your Chromebook, you are familiar with using your mouse to perform such actions. When you are working with data on R Studio Cloud, however, you will not be able to use your mouse for everything that you'll want to do. It will be important to become comfortable with the idea of a Terminal as a place for purely text-based commands. In R Studio Cloud, the Terminal is located in the tab next to the Console.

When you click on this tab, you will see a pane that looks as follows. You will always see a string of text at the beginning of the line. This is called the Terminal prompt. To the right of the dollar sign, you will be entering your commands. The Terminal is going to be extremely important in the next course when you learn about version control systems and Git Hub because it is the primary interface for working with those tools.

To better understand why we need to learn about commands for navigating in the Terminal, let's take a look again at the folder structure/directory structure that you created earlier in this course. Within a project folder, it is recommended that you set up the folders within as follows. In future courses, whenever you write code and run commands within R to work with data, or whenever you use Git commands to document updates to your files, you will be working in a particular location. To know your location within a file system is to know exactly what folder you are in right now. For example, you may currently be working on preliminary versions of R code within the raw_code subdirectory. That is, you are inside the raw_code subdirectory. Knowing this is important because if you want to tell Terminal to perform some actions on files in other folders, you will need to be able to tell the Terminal where that folder is. That is, you will need to be able to specify a path to that folder. A path is a string that specifies a sequence of folders to traverse to end up at a final destination.

For example, you may wish to navigate to the exploratory subfolder within the figures folder to see what graphics you've created. There are two ways to specify that location. You can specify a path to that folder based on where you are right now (in raw_code). A path that is relative to a particular folder is called a relative path.

Alternatively, you can specify a path to that folder based on starting from the root directory of the file system. The root directory of a file system is specified with a single forward slash and is special in that it cannot be contained within other folders. In this file system, the root directory contains only one folder cloud. A path that begins with a forward slash is an absolute path; it starts at the root directory. It may be helpful to consider the following analogy. The root directory is analogous to a town square, a universal starting location. The desired destination location might be the baker. An absolute path specifies how to reach the bakery starting from this universal starting location of the town square. However, if we are in the library right now, a relative path would specify how to reach the bakery from our current location in the library. This could be pretty different than the path from the town square. We will be discussing both absolute and relative paths throughout this lesson.

Let's get familiar with essential commands for performing certain actions in the Terminal.

If you want to know where you are (what folder you are in), you can use the p w d command by typing p w d at the Terminal prompt and hitting Enter. This stands for "print working directory", and it prints the absolute path to your current location. In the example below we are in the project folder within the cloud folder. We can determine that this is an absolute path because it starts with a forward slash.

If you want to know what files and folders are contained within your current directory, you can use the l s command. This stands for "list", and it lists the files and folders within the current directory. If you just use the l s command without any options, the contents will be displayed horizontally across lines. If you add the dash l h option with a space after the initial l s command, the output is displayed more nicely. The l part displays the results in a longer form with more information than just the file name. The h part displays the file sizes in a human-readable format. The most important pieces of information are in the last three columns, which display the file or folder size, the date the file or folder was last modified, and the name of the file or folder. You can also list the contents of a specific folder by specifying an absolute or relative path after the main l s command. In the example below, we list the contents of the products subfolder using a relative path.

If you would like to change your current working folder, you can use the c d command. This stands for "change directory" and moves you to the folder that you specify with a path after c d. If I want to move to the raw_data folder, I can specify this with a relative path data slash raw_data because I am currently in the cloud slash project folder. When you type these paths, it will be incredibly useful to use the tab completion feature of Terminal. With tab completion, you can partially type part of a folder or file name and hit tab to automatically fill in the remainder of the name. So here I can type c d d a, and when I hit tab, this will automatically complete to c d data because there are no other files or folders in this folder that start with da. From here I can type c d data slash r and hit tab to automatically fill in the complete command c d data slash raw_data. Try this out when you're typing at the Terminal prompt - it will save you a lot of time!

I could also have specified an absolute path with cd slash cloud slash project slash data slash raw_data. In this case, because of my initial working directory, both the relative and absolute paths take me to the same folder. Note that we have checked our updated working directory with the p w d command. Note that this path also happens to match the part of the Terminal prompt just before the dollar sign. This is a way to doubly verify where you are within the file system.

If you try to change directory to a nonexistent folder, you will get an error message that looks as below.

Let's go a little bit further with exploring the difference between absolute and relative paths. Let's say that I have some code in the raw_code folder, and in that code, I want to create some exploratory graphics in the exploratory folder. Using our file system on R Studio Cloud, the path to the exploratory folder could be specified with the absolute path slash cloud slash project slash figures slash exploratory. However, if someone else copies over the four main folders (data, code, figures, and products) onto their own computer and puts them inside folders with different names, this absolute path will not work. This person has the root and work folders instead of the cloud and project folders.

Rather than using an absolute path, a robust way to specify the path to the exploratory folder is with a relative path. In this way, our code will work on all computers, which is essential for data science work. Specifying this relative path is a little more complicated than we have seen earlier because we have to traverse up through some folders that contain our current working directory and down through another set of folders. To specify the folder containing the current working directory, we use dot dot slash. When we are in the raw_code folder, the dot dot slash  specifies the code folder because it is the one directly containing our current directory. However, to enter the figures folder, we need to go up one more level to the folder that contains the code folder. On R Studio Cloud, this is the project folder, but for this other person, it is the work folder. We can go "up" one more folder level with another dot dot slash . So the complete relative path from raw_code to exploratory is dot dot slash dot dot slash figures slash exploratory.

Let's look at one more example to reinforce these ideas. Our current working directory is the raw_code directory. We want to specify a path to the final_code directory. There are several ways to do acheive this, but the first listed below is the most straightforward.

Often when working in the Terminal, you will want to run the same or similar commands that you have run earlier. For example, you may want to change directories, list files, and then repeat this process as you change to other directories. You can avoid typing commands over and over by using the up and down arrow keys at the Terminal prompt. Hitting the up arrow key pulls up the last command that you entered. You can keep hitting up and down to cycle through your previous commands.

In several different Terminal commands, it can be useful to specify only part of a file or folder name. For example, if we go to the raw_code folder and use the l s command, we see that there are 4 files. In larger projects, there may be many more files and we might not want to view all of them. We can specify certain patterns of files to list after the main l s command using part of the file name combined with the asterisk wildcard operator. This operator matches any number of characters. So to list only files that start with "clean", we can use l s dash l h clean asterisk. To only list files that contain "dataset1", we can use l s dash l h asterisk dataset1 asterisk to match any characters on either side of the "dataset1" pattern. This will be useful when you work more with Git Hub, starting in the next course.

The Terminal is an interface to the operating system of a computer that you will mainly be using for interfacing with Git Hub, which will be covered in the next course. The essentials of working with the Terminal include knowing exactly what folder you are in with the p w d command, changing folders with the cd command, and listing files with the l s command. When you work with Git commands in the next course, you will mostly be using the Terminal to navigate to the correct working directory and using Git commands to track changes you make in specified files. In order to specify those files, you will need to be comfortable with entering relative paths, as we covered in this lesson. Because Git commands allow use of the asterisk wildcard operator, it will be useful for you to become comfortable with "testing" your syntax of specifying files with the l s command. That is, you can play with the wildcards and their placement using the l s command to make sure the correct files are listed. Then you can use the same pattern to specify those files in a Git command.

